http://www.diva-portal.org




This is the published version of a paper presented at 33th Congress of the International
Council of the Aeronautical Sciences.



  Citation for the original published paper:

  Holmgren, E., Haldar, D., Bertling Tjernberg, L., Johansson, J. (2022)
  More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact
  In: ICAS, Proceedings, 33th Congress of the International Council of the Aeronautical
  Sciences, Stockholm, Sweden
  ICAS Proceedings




N.B. When citing this work, cite the original published paper.




Permanent link to this version:
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:kth:diva-328210
                         MORE ELECTRIC AIRCRAFT (MEA)
                       SCALING ASPECTS AND WEIGHT IMPACT
          Emil Holmgren1 , Dhruv Haldar1 , Lina Bertling Tjernberg2 & Andreas Johansson2,3
                               1 KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
    2 School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
                                             3 SAAB, Linköping, Sweden




                                                     Abstract

This paper is about investigating the differences in fuel consumption of conventional and equivalent electrical
subsystems of passenger aircraft. The goal is to develop a framework that can help evaluate fuel consumption
of passenger aircraft, both conventional aircraft and More Electric Aircraft (MEA), for a given size of aircraft
and a given stretch of flight.
The work presented in this paper originates from pre-studies within MEA research performed by the Reliability
Centered Asset Management (RCAM) research group at KTH in collaboration with SAAB that has been done
on a passenger aircraft with comparable size to the Airbus A320. The main difference to the prior study is
the addition of subsystem weight, passenger scaling effects, environmental dependencies and flight profile, all
added to increase the accuracy and diversity of the model. The fuel consumption is based on studies of existing
technology for several passenger aircraft from Airbus and Boeing. The main focus was the Environmental
Control System (ECS).
A numerical model of passenger aircraft including the ECS was constructed in MATLAB with different levels
of electrification, a conventional ECS or a fully electric ECS. A special case with an Airbus A320 with 180
passengers doing a round trip between Copenhagen and Stockholm on a hot day was studied.
The results show possible fuel savings in the magnitude of 4% to 8% when electrifying the ECS for the case
studied and for aircraft with 156 to 700 passengers.
Keywords: More Electric Aircraft (MEA), Environmental Control System (ECS), Fuel Consumption Simula-
tion, Subsystem Weight Impact, Passenger Scaling


1. Introduction
The Advisory Council for Aeronautics Research in Europe (ACARE) [1] has set several goals to be
accomplished by 2050 for aviation. Some goals proposed are a 75% reduction in carbon dioxide
(CO2 ) emissions per passenger kilometre, a 90% reduction in nitrogen oxide (NOx ) emissions and a
reduction of perceived noise emittance of aircraft by 65%. These goals are relative to typical new
passenger aircraft in 2000.
More Electric Aircraft (MEA) technologies aim in reducing greenhouse gas emissions to make air
transport more energy-efficient, while still being cost-effective and reliable.
To help decide if it is worth investing in a new subsystem, a framework has been developed to
calculate the fuel consumption of conventional and electrical subsystems for a given flight and for the
most common passenger aircraft sizes. The framework originates specifically from prior project [2].
Due to time constraints, only the Environmental Control System (ECS), the largest secondary power
consumer, has been modelled in detail. Other subsystems are included in the model, but are not
described in the same level and are not presented in this paper.
                                              More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

2. Methodology and Problem Formulation
The general questions, leading to this paper, are:

    • Can the MEA technology assist the air transportation industry in the reduction of fuel consump-
      tion and achieving the climate goals?

    • What is the fuel consumption of a passenger aircraft with different levels of electrification?

    • Is the weight penalty going to eliminate the positive effect of higher efficiency for new subsys-
      tems?

    • How does passenger-scaling (pax-scaling) affect the overall fuel consumption of the aircraft?

The fuel consumption is reflected by the power usage of the aircraft and all its subsystems, therefore
it is important to understand how they work and what is affecting their power consumption. Power to
generate thrust is the largest consumer and is called primary power. Secondary power is all other
power that is not used to generate thrust.
Subsystems may differ in technology, efficiency, power management, weight and drag. Since every
subsystem on an aircraft are connected and affecting each other in many ways, it is not clear if one
system solution is better than the other.
The pax-scaling, which is the factor that more than any other factors determines the aircraft size, is
thought to influence the overall efficiency of the aircraft.
Flight conditions, such as ambient temperature, speed and altitude should have an impact on fuel
consumption.
To understand how all these factors affect the fuel consumption, detailed energy-models for every
subsystem must be developed. When all the subsystems are modelled along with the flight dynamics,
a simulation for the complete aircraft can be made for a given flight profile, to obtain the total fuel spent
on a flight.
By combining different subsystem technologies and various levels of electrification, multiple virtual
aircraft can be simulated side by side and compared.

3. Thrust Fuel Consumption
Thrust fuel consumption can be calculated with:

                                        ṁ f uel,T = T · T SFC   [kg/s]                                   (1)
, where T [N] is the thrust and T SFC [kg/(N·s)] is the Thrust Specific Fuel Consumption of the aircraft
jet engine.

According to [3], the T SFC of modern passenger aircraft jet’s engines in cruise is around 16 [mg/(N·s)],
based on JET-A1 as fuel. Very advanced engines can have a value as low as 14 [mg/(N·s)]. An esti-
mation of T SFC as function of speed and temperature can be shown to be:
                                                              r
                                          −5          −5        Tamb
                        T SFC = (1.13 · 10 + 1.25 · 10 · M) ·         [kg/(N · s)]
                                                                 T0
, where M is the flight Mach number. Tamb [K] is the ambient temperature at altitude and T0 = 288 K.

To determine thrust, a simplified 2D model containing forces acting on the aircraft in flight was estab-
lished according to fig. 1.




                                                       2
                                                    More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact




                                 Figure 1 – 2D forces on the aircraft in flight.

Thrust can then be expressed as:

                                    T = D + m · (g + av ) · sin(θ ) + m · a           [N]                       (2)
, where

                  D    [N]        is the aircraft drag
                  m    [kg]       is the aircraft mass
                   g   [m/s2 ]    is the gravitational constant
                  av   [m/s2 ]    is the vertical acceleration of the aircraft
                  θ               is the climb angle of the aircraft
                   a   [m/s2 ]    is the acceleration in the flight direction of the aircraft.

Aircraft drag is a sum of zero-lift drag and lift induced drag. The zero-lift drag is relatively complicated
to calculate as it depends on many factors such as aircraft size, configuration and flight profile.


3.1 Weight Impact of Subsystems on the Fuel Consumption
The weight of subsystems contributes to fuel consumption through the required thrust to carry them.
Using eq. 1 and 2 in combination with subsystem mass, mss , and lift induced drag coefficient, CDi ,
gives the subsystem weight fuel consumption:

                    ṁ f uel,ss = T SFC · mss · ((g + av ) · (CDi · cos(θ ) + sin(θ )) + a)   [kg/s]

4. Secondary Power Fuel Consumption
There are many kinds of secondary power, and they can be divided into a few categories, depending
on how they are transferred to the consumer. The difference between each category is simply their
transfer efficiency. Since all secondary power is generated by the jet engine, they can be traced
back to the engine shaft power. A flowchart showing the relation between secondary power and fuel
consumption can be seen in fig. 2.
Pneumatic power or bleed-air power is proportional to the bleed-air mass flow rate and the bleed-air
temperature, while the bleed-air temperature is dependent on the engine and the thrust setting. It is
therefore necessary to estimate the thrust setting of the engines and combine it with engine data to
obtain the bleed-air temperature.

According to [3], the engine shaft power fuel consumption can be calculated with:

                                      ṁ f uel,sha f t = Psha f t · k p · T SFC   [kg/s]                        (3)
, where Psha f t [W] is the engine shaft power and k p [N/W] is the Shaft Power Factor.



                                                               3
                                             More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact




        Figure 2 – Flowchart showing how secondary power are related to fuel consumption.


An approximation of the Shaft Power Factor, kP [N/W], for similar turbofan engines as function of Mach
number, M, and altitude, h [m], was derived to be:

            kP = 0.0057 + 4.60 · 10−8 h − 0.0106M − 4.44 · 10−13 h2 + 1.85 · 10−7 hM + 0.0049M 2

5. Environmental Control System (ECS) Fuel Consumption
The Environmental Control System (ECS) is responsible for maintaining a pleasant temperature,
healthy pressure and good air quality in the cabin. The ECS is designed and operated to meet the
requirements specified by the Code of Federal Regulations by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) [4].
The operation of the ECS is simulated with a simplified thermodynamic model of the cabin, where
the control volume is a function of aircraft size and the heat flux are functions of the flight profile and
the number of passengers (pax). The number of passengers decides over the size of the aircraft.
The fresh air mass flow rate that is injected into the cabin is determined by the temperature of the
injected air and the heat flux balance of the cabin, while the fresh air mass flow rate must be at least
0.55 pounds per minute (4.16 g/s) for each occupant. In this study, the minimum fresh air mass flow
rate is chosen to be 6 g/(pax·s) [5].

Three ECS variants are included in this study:

  1. Conventional bleed-air driven Air Cycle Machine (ACM)

  2. Electrical Air Cycle Machine (E-ACM)

  3. Electrical Vapour Cycle Machine (E-VCM)

5.1 Conventional Air Cycle Machine (ACM)
The conventional Air Cycle Machine (ACM) is driven by pressurized air from the engine compressor,
also called bleed-air. The ACM is responsible for cooling of the hot bleed-air before it is sent to the
cabin. A relatively small amount of electric power is used to control the ECS and to drive electric
circulation fans.

To maintain a cabin temperature of 295.15 K (22 ◦ C) under various conditions, the ECS will initially
adjust the temperature of the injected fresh air. If adjusting the fresh air temperature is not enough,
then the airflow rate can be increased. Air pressure in the cabin is maintained and regulated through

                                                     4
                                                          More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

Out-Flow Valves, OFV, located at the bottom rear of the fuselage.

Thermal equilibrium for a hot day and the aircraft stationary on the ground can be described with:

                                             Q̇ECS + Q̇shadow + Q̇sun + Q̇ pax = 0                                       (4)
, where

                             Q̇ECS     is the heat flux from the ECS
                           Q̇shadow    is the heat flux through the fuselage in the shadow
                               Q̇sun   is the heat flux through the fuselage in the sun
                              Q̇ pax   is the passenger associated heat flux.

Heat flux from the ECS can be defined as:

                                              Q̇ECS = ṁair ·Cp · (TECS − Tcabin )                                       (5)
, where ṁair is the air mass flow rate, Cp is specific heat capacity of air, TECS is air temperature pro-
vided by the ECS and Tcabin is the cabin temperature.

Heat flux through the part of the fuselage, that is in the shadow, from ambient air is:

                                       Q̇shadow = U · (Awet − A pro j ) · (Tamb − Tcabin )                               (6)
, where U is the thermal conductivity of the fuselage skin, Awet is the wet surface area of the fuselage,
A pro j is the projected area of the fuselage, Tamb is the ambient temperature and Tcabin is the cabin
temperature.

Heat flux through the part of the fuselage, that is in the sun, can be expressed as:

                                         Q̇sun = U · A pro j · (Tamb + ∆Tsolar − Tcabin )                                (7)
, where ∆Tsolar is the average temperature rise of the surface, due to solar radiation. The temperature
rise is approximately 10 K, for a white surface [6].

The passenger associated heat flux, Q̇ pax , is based on metabolic heat and all other facilities such as
entertainment, lighting, galley etc. It is roughly 190 W/pax [7].

5.1.1 ACM Fresh Air Mass Flow Rate
By combining eq. 4-7 and solving for the air mass flow rate, for on ground conditions, gives:

                           U · (Awet − A pro j ) · (Tamb − Tcabin ) +U · A pro j · (Tamb + ∆Tsolar − Tcabin ) + Q̇ pax
          ṁair,static =                                                                                                 (8)
                                                             Cp · (Tcabin − Tinlet )
, where cooling is assumed with Tinlet = 259.37 K (-13.8 ◦ C) [9], for a hot day. Tinlet is the temperature
of the air that is entering the mixing chamber before it is sent to the cabin.

When flying, it is assumed that forced convection will remove most of the solar heating. The tem-
perature rise due to solar heating will then be relatively small and can be neglected. The ambient
temperature, Tamb , is replaced with total temperature, Ttot , to include the kinetic heating effect, thus
the air mass flow rate can be calculated as:

                                                         U · Awet · (Ttot − Tcabin ) + Q̇ pax
                                         ṁair, f ly =                                                                   (9)
                                                              Cp · (Tcabin − Tinlet )
If heating is required (if eq. 8 or 9 gives negative values), then heating with Tinlet = 393.15 K (120 ◦ C)
is assumed [9].

                                                                    5
                                                   More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

It must be ensured that the fresh air mass flow rate meets the regulation. If the calculated air mass
flow rate is smaller than the minimum value, ṁair,min = 0.006 · pax kg/s, then ṁair is set to ṁair,min .
With the regulated air mass flow rate, a new inlet temperature is calculated:

                                                     U · Awet · (Ttot − Tcabin ) + Q̇ pax
                                 Tinlet = Tcabin −
                                                                Cp · ṁair,min

5.1.2 ACM Pre-Cooler and Heat Exchangers
Excessive heat from the bleed-air is expelled through the pre-cooler and the heat exchangers in the
ACM. Cooling-air that is flowing through the pre-cooler comes from the engine fan and is costing
engine shaft power. Cooling-air through the heat exchangers is taken via air scoops from outside air
and is inducing drag to the aircraft.

The air mass flow rate through the pre-cooler and heat exchangers are calculated with the simple
assumption that the difference of temperature between the hot air inlet and the cold air outlet is ∆Thx .
Further, an adiabatic process is assumed where no heat is transferred to the environment, except in
the heat exchanger itself.

For safety reasons, the bleed-air is cooled down in the pre-cooler below the autoignition temperature
(Tsa f e = 200 ◦ C) of jet fuel before it leaves the engine. If cooling of bleed-air is needed (Tbleed > Tsa f e ),
then the ratio of engine fan air to bleed-air mass flow rate can be expressed as:
                                                ṁ f an        Tbleed − Tsa f e
                                     ξ f an =           =
                                                ṁair     (Tbleed − ∆Thx ) − T f an
, otherwise ξ f an = 0.

The cooling-air flow rate through the heat exchangers in the ACM is expressed as:
                                                               Tsa f e − Tshx
                                        ṁhx = ṁair ·                                                        (10)
                                                         (Tsa f e − ∆Thx ) − Ttot
, where Tshx is the air temperature after the secondary heat exchanger.

5.1.3 ACM Air Scoops Drag
Intake of cooling-air through the air scoops for the heat exchangers induces drag to the aircraft and
can be expressed as:

                                                   Dscoops = ṁhx · v                                         (11)
, where ṁhx comes from eq. 10, while v is the true air speed of the aircraft.
The fuel consumption that is induced by air scoops drag is calculated according to eq. 1 by:

                                      ṁ f uel,scoops = Dscoops · T SFC     [kg/s]                            (12)

5.1.4 ACM Shaft Power
For bleed-air, shaft power is a function of air mass flow rate and bleed temperature. According to [7],
exergy (in this case, engine shaft power) can be calculated using:

                                Exergy = Psha f t = ṁair · [(h − h0 ) + T0 · (s − s0 )]                      (13)
, where




                                                            6
                                                      More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

                           Psha f t      is the shaft power
                            ṁair        is the bleed-air mass flow rate
                                h        is the enthalpy of bleed-air
                              h0         is the enthalpy of air at compressor inlet
                              T0         is the temperature at compressor inlet
                                 s       is the entropy of bleed-air
                               s0        is the entropy of air at compressor inlet

Enthalpy and entropy can be obtained from data tables when all the temperatures are known. The
compressor inlet temperature is the total temperature (static + kinetic), while the compressor outlet
temperature is the same as bleed temperature.

When an Auxiliary Power Unit (APU) is providing bleed-air, the bleed-air temperature is:

                                                    Tbleed = 1.352 · Ttot
, assuming that the pressure ratio is 2.5 [8], and the compressor efficiency is 0.85. When the engines
are running, the bleed temperature will be set by the engines and various conditions.

The shaft power for the conventional ACM ECS is a sum of 3 different terms, shaft power for fresh
air (bleed-air), shaft power for pre-cooler (bleed-air from engine fan) and shaft power for electric
circulation fans:

                                   Psha f t,ACM = Psha f t,bleed + Psha f t, f an + Psha f t,c f
With help from eq. 13 these terms can be expressed as:

                          Psha f t,bleed = ṁair · [(hbleed − htot ) + Ttot · (sbleed − stot )]


                         Psha f t, f an = ξ f an · ṁair · [(h f an − htot ) + Ttot · (s f an − stot )]
, where

                         hbleed       is the enthalpy of bleed-air
                          h f an      is the enthalpy of the engine fan-air
                           htot       is the enthalpy of air at the compressor inlet
                           Ttot       is the temperature at the compressor inlet
                         sbleed       is the entropy of bleed-air
                          s f an      is the entropy of the engine fan-air
                           stot       is the entropy of air at the compressor inlet

The engine shaft power to run the circulation fans is:
                                                                      Pc f
                                           Psha f t,c f =                                                        (14)
                                                            ηgbx · ηgen · ηtrn · ηmot
, where

                              Pc f       is the power of the circulation fans
                             ηgbx        is the accessory gearbox efficiency
                             ηgen        is the generator efficiency
                             ηtrn        is the electric power transfer efficiency
                             ηmot        is the motor efficiency

When the engine shaft power for the ACM ECS is known, then the fuel consumption is calculated
with eq. 3.

                                                                 7
                                                  More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

5.2 Electrical Air Cycle Machine (E-ACM)
The electric ACM works in the same way as the conventional version. The compressed air mass flow
rate is the same as for the ACM. The only difference is the source of the compressed air and the
shaft power calculation, since the power is taking a different path from the engine.

Beginning with the supply of compressed fresh air from the electrical compressor. The supply pres-
sure is about 150 kPa above cabin pressure [8]. The pressure ratio for the supply air is then:

                                                         Pcabin + 150 kPa
                                            πcomp =
                                                                Ptot
Depending on flight condition and compressor efficiency, the compressed air temperature can be
expressed as:
                                                        γ−1     
                                                       πcomp − 1 
                                                          γ

                                   Tcomp = Ttot · 1 +                                     (15)
                                                         ηcomp

                                             C
, where πcomp is the pressure ratio, γ = Cvp is the ratio of specific heat for air. It changes with tempera-
ture, but can be approximated to γ ≈ 1.4 in this case. ηcomp is the compressor efficiency.

5.2.1 E-ACM Heat Exchangers
With the same procedure as with the conventional ACM, the cooling-air mass flow rate through the
heat exchangers is calculated as:
                                                             Tcomp − Tshx
                                        ṁhx = ṁair ·
                                                         (Tcomp − ∆Thx ) − Ttot
, where Tcomp comes from eq. 15.

5.2.2 E-ACM Air Scoops Drag
The amount of air mass flow rate through air scoops for the E-ACM is the sum of cooling-air, ṁhx , and
fresh air, ṁair . This leads to a drag calculation, similar to eq. 11:

                                             Dscoops = v · (ṁhx + ṁair )
The fuel consumption that is induced by air scoops drag is calculated with eq. 12.

5.2.3 E-ACM Shaft Power
With eq. 13, the compressor power can be calculated as:

                               Pcomp = ṁair · [(hcomp − htot ) + Ttot · (scomp − stot )]
This power comes from the engine shaft, through a gearbox, a generator, cables, power converters
and a motor, all having an efficiency less than unity. Finally, shaft power that is extracted from the
engine to the compressor and for the E-ACM can be calculated using:
                                                                  Pcomp
                                       Psha f t,comp =
                                                         ηgbx · ηgen · ηtrn · ηmot

                                       Psha f t,EACM = Psha f t,comp + Psha f t,c f
, where shaft power for the circulation fans, Psha f t,c f , is the same as in eq. 14.

The same way as with the conventional ECS, the fuel consumption of the electric version is calculated
with eq. 3.



                                                            8
                                                 More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

5.3 Electrical Vapour Cycle Machine (E-VCM)
Like the E-ACM, the E-VCM also uses an electric air compressor to deliver air to the cabin, but at a
lower pressure, since the pressurized air is not used to drive the machine, as for the E-ACM. Cooling
is done through the Vapour Cycle Machine (VCM). The fresh air mass flow rate and inlet temperature
are the same for the VCM as for the previous machines, since they are all simulated with the same
cabin model.

5.3.1 E-VCM Operation
The supply pressure is about 20 kPa above the cabin pressure [8]. The pressure ratio for the supply
air is then:

                                                         Pcabin + 20 kPa
                                            πcomp =
                                                                Ptot
The compressed air temperature, Tcomp , is calculated as in eq. 15.

If cooling is needed by the VCM, then the cooling power is expressed as:

                                   Q̇VCM = ṁair ·Cp · ((Ttot + ∆Thx ) − Tinlet )
The power to run the vapour cycle compressor is calculated as:

                                                                Q̇VCM
                                               Pcomp,VCM =
                                                                COPR
Coefficient of Performance Refrigerator (COPR ) can vary depending on temperatures and refrigerant,
but be set to 3, for simplicity. This means that 1 kW of power input to the VCM motor can pull out 3
kW of heat from the supplied air.

Since the compressed air temperature is not as high as for the previous cycle machines, cooling
through heat exchangers is not always necessary. Often, heat exchangers must be throttled or even
turned off. The cooling-air mass flow rate through the primary heat exchanger is:

                                                     Tcomp − (Ttot + ∆Thx )
                                  ṁ phx = ṁair ·                          = ṁair
                                                     (Tcomp − ∆Thx ) − Ttot
While the cooling-air mass flow rate through the secondary heat exchanger is:

                                                     Q̇VCM · (1 + 1/COPr )
                                         ṁshx =
                                                        Cp · (Tshx − Ttot )
If no cooling is required, then the vapour cycle compressor is turned off, Pcomp,VCM = 0 and as a
consequence, there is no cooling-air flow through the secondary heat exchanger, ṁshx = 0.
Cooling-air mass flow rate through the primary heat exchanger is throttled according to:
                                                             Tcomp − Tinlet
                                      ṁ phx = ṁair ·
                                                         (Tcomp − ∆Thx ) − Ttot
In freezing conditions, such as cruising at high altitudes, an electric heater is most likely needed to
add more heat to the cabin. If heating is needed, then the primary heat exchanger is bypassed,
ṁ phx = 0, and the electric heater is turned on with a power of:

                     Peh = −U · Awet · (Ttot − Tcabin ) − ṁair ·Cp · (Tcomp − Tcabin ) − Q̇ pax




                                                            9
                                                More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

5.3.2 E-VCM Air Scoops Drag
The amount of air mass flow rate through air scoops for the E-VCM is the sum of cooling-air through
the primary heat exchanger and secondary heat exchanger plus fresh air. The drag calculation is
similar to eq. 11:

                                       Dscoops = v · (ṁ phx + ṁshx + ṁair )
The fuel consumption that is induced by air scoops drag is calculated with eq. 12.

5.3.3 E-VCM Shaft Power
Power to compress supply air is expressed as:

                            Pcomp = ṁair · [(hcomp − htot ) + Ttot · (scomp − stot )]
The total shaft power to run the E-VCM is:
                                       Pcomp + Pcomp,VCM + Pc f + Phx f          Peh
                     Psha f t,EVCM =                                    +
                                           ηgbx · ηgen · ηtrn · ηmot      ηgbx · ηgen · ηtrn
, where power for the circulation fans ,Pc f , is the same as for the conventional ACM. Power to pull
cooling-air through the heat exchangers is Phx f .

When the total shaft power to run the E-VCM is known, then the fuel consumption of the E-VCM ECS
is calculated with eq. 3.




                                                        10
                                             More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

6. Numerical Model
Everything on and around an aircraft is connected and interacts with each other in a variety of com-
plexity. To make the result more interesting, all the details must be at a certain level, which will require
the calculations to be automated.
The complicated nature of the problem is tackled by dividing it up into several modules, each one
focusing on a specific task. The modular structure also facilitates the reusing of code and improves
its readability. See fig. 3. The flow of information between the modules is visualized by the arrows in
the figure.
The Numerical Model will form the Framework to compare various aircraft setups under different flight
conditions. Several aircraft can be executed in parallel, making comparison easy.




     Figure 3 – The MATLAB code is built with several modules to break down the problem into
                                    uncomplicated steps.




                                                    11
                                            More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

7. Simulation Result
A case study was done with the Airbus A320 and 180 passengers (pax) on a round trip Copenhagen-
Stockholm-Copenhagen. Three different passenger aircraft were simulated in parallel. They are all
based on the same aircraft, but with different ECS, flying on the same path. A hot day (30 ◦ C on
the ground) was chosen because it was thought that the heat will stress the ECS to work harder,
magnifying the systems’ differences.

7.1 ECS Fuel Consumption
Fig. 4 shows a breakdown of the fuel consumption of all 3 ECS configurations. The labels in the
figure are explained by:

Operation is the fuel required to operate the ECS.
Weight Penalty is the fuel spent to carry the weight of the ECS.
Air Scoops Drag is the fuel consumption induced by the intake of the outside air through air scoops.
ECS Forced Thrust is the increased thrust fuel consumption, forced by the ECS.




                Figure 4 – ECS fuel consumption breakdown for a round trip flight,
             Copenhagen-Stockholm-Copenhagen, with a modelled A320 and 180 pax.

The ACM is more efficient than the E-ACM. If the effect of weight and drag are added, then the
E-ACM becomes even more inferior. However, in this particular case, for the bleed-air driven ACM,
there were some moments when the ECS forced the engines to run at a higher thrust setting than
was required by the aircraft. If this thrust increased fuel consumption is taken into consideration, then
the conventional ACM has a clear disadvantage over the electrical options.

The VCM has the most efficient operation, consuming about half the fuel amount of the ACM. But the
increased weight penalty and drag offset some operational efficiency.
                                                   12
                                            More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

7.2 ECS Partial Results
This section will show and discuss significant partial results from a simulation of the case study.

7.2.1 Air Mass Flow Rates
Beginning with the Air Mass Flow Rates for the case study. Fig. 5 shows the air mass flow rates
for all 3 systems. When the ECS is active, the minimum fresh air flow rate for the cabin is ṁair,min =
0.006 · 180 = 1.08 kg/s, otherwise it is zero. During the cruise, when heating is required, all systems
will run at ṁair,min . When cooling is needed at lower altitudes, the flow rates are higher. All three
systems use the same amount of fresh air. Ram air for the ACM heat exchanger and ram air for the
VCM heat exchangers are also shown. The hot side of the VCM is not allowed to be more than 80
◦ C, which is a relatively low temperature; this explains why the secondary heat exchanger requires

much cooling-air.




          Figure 5 – ECS air mass flow rates for the case study. The load factor is 100%.




                                                   13
                                          More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

7.2.2 Compressed Air Temperatures
The numerical model for the engine is based on engine maps for the CFM International CFM56-5B
engine. Compressed air temperature from various parts can be seen in fig. 6. Each flight begins with
the APU starting up and providing compressed air for the aircraft. Right before taxiing, the engines
start and take over the role to provide power for the aircraft. Small steps can be seen in the graph.
During takeoff, the engines are suddenly working much harder, which also increases the bleed-air
temperature. It can be seen as spikes in the graph. A few seconds later, when the Low Pressure
Compressor (LPC) pressure is high enough, switching over from High Pressure Compressor (HPC)
to LPC occurs. This explains the sudden drop in the bleed-air temperature. Switching back to HPC
from LPC instantly increases the bleed-air temperature.




                    Figure 6 – Compressed air temperatures for the case study.




                                                 14
                                            More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

7.2.3 Bleed Ports Air Pressure
Pressure for the CFM56-5B engine bleed ports can be seen in fig. 7. It is desirable to extract bleed-air
at the LPC, since lower bleed-pressure means lower bleed-temperature and lower fuel consumption.
But, the bleed-pressure must exceed the lower limit, to be able to drive the ACM. It is set to 250 kPa
[8].

The bleed pressure is relatively constant during cruise, except for when the aircraft changes flight
level. During the descent, the engines are idling or have just enough power to keep the bleed pressure
limit. For landing, thrust and pressure increase slightly and continues during the taxi until the aircraft
turns off the engines at the gate.




                      Figure 7 – Pressure at the bleed ports for the case study.




                                                   15
                                           More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

7.2.4 ECS Operational Fuel Consumption
The fuel consumption to operate the ECS can be seen in fig. 8. It is interesting to see the transition
from APU to the engine’s fuel consumption in the graph. The fuel consumption steps up for the ACM
because bleed air temperature from the engines is higher. But for the electric machines, the fuel con-
sumption steps down. This is explained by the higher efficiency of the engines to generate electricity.

It can also be seen where minimum fuel consumption occurs for all three systems, a short moment
after takeoff and before landing. This is at an altitude where internal and external heat loads for the
fuselage is in balance and minimal effort is required by the ECS to maintain the temperature in the
cabin. Below this "heat balance altitude" the ambient temperature is higher and cooling is needed,
while flying above this altitude heating is necessary.




                  Figure 8 – ECS operational fuel consumption for the case study.




                                                  16
                                           More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

7.2.5 Effect of the Ground Temperature on the ECS Fuel Consumption
How will the temperature on the ground affect the fuel consumption for the ECS? According to the
International Standard Atmosphere (ISA), the temperature at ground level is 15 ◦ C and declining lin-
early down to -56.5 ◦ C at an altitude of 11000 m. Above that altitude up to 20000 m it is constant at
-56.5 ◦ C. For the simulations, the ISA model is modified to accommodate whatever temperature there
is on the ground, by simply setting the temperature on the ground and let it change linearly down to
-56.5 ◦ C at 11000 m and be constant up to 20000 m. With this simplification, it is obvious that when
adjusting the ground temperature, the biggest changes will appear close to the ground.

Fig. 9 show the total ECS fuel consumption for a range of temperatures on the ground. The curves
appear to be segmented and can be approximated into simple functions. Each segment represents
the domination of a particular operation of the ECS. The slope of the lines correspond to the sensi-
tivity, of each system, to the temperature change on the ground.
At lower temperature, the bleed-air driven ACM is dominated by heating operation, and it is relatively
insensitive to temperature changes. The bleed-air from the engines is hot, and the ACM require little
effort to heat up the cabin, even in freezing winter conditions. Above the breaking point, at around 22
◦ C, cooling operation dominates, and the slope is steeper. More air is flowing through the air scoops

and the heat exchangers, increasing the drag and fuel consumption. The ACM and the E-ACM are
essentially the same machine with the same response to the ground temperature changes. The
difference between them is mostly consisting of the ECS Forced Thrust fuel consumption.
The E-VCM has an additional segment, revealing a feature that the other systems don’t have. The
fuel consumption of the E-VCM in freezing conditions dominates by the usage of the electric heater.




      Figure 9 – ECS fuel consumption for the case study with different ground temperatures.



                                                  17
                                          More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

7.2.6 Thrust Fuel Consumption
The fuel consumption to generate thrust is plotted in fig. 10. The ECS Forced Thrust fuel consump-
tion is marked as the shaded area. It is applied during the majority of the descent. The combination
of low ambient pressure, at high altitude, and low thrust setting, resulted in too low bleed pressure
from the engines. To maintain normal operation of the ACM, the ECS then forces the engines to run
at a higher thrust setting.




  Figure 10 – Fuel consumption due to thrust and ECS Forced Thrust (shaded area) for the case
                     study. E-ACM and E-VCM curves are practically identical.




                                                 18
                                          More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

7.3 Passenger Scaling Effect on Fuel Consumption
The effect of pax-scaling on the fuel consumption was investigated by running several simulations of
the case study with passenger numbers from 156 to 700 pax. The result was then combined into
figures to visualize the trends. First, the fuel consumption of different ECS is shown. The largest
amount of fuel is used for propulsion, thus thrust fuel consumption is plotted. The fuel consumption
of the whole aircraft is displayed. Lastly, the relative fuel savings are shown for all the passenger
aircraft sizes in this study.

The fuel consumption of the bleed-air driven ECS can be seen in fig. 11. The coloured areas
represent different aspects of the ECS that contribute to fuel consumption. The fuel consumption of
the ACM Operation, Weight Penalty and Air Scoops Drag are almost unaffected by the pax-scaling,
while the ECS Forced Thrust shows a noticeable relation to pax-scaling. Since thrust is firmly
connected to the aircraft’s weight, it can be presumed that the ECS Forced Thrust fuel consumption
will reflect the weight per passenger of the aircraft. Compare the shape of the ECS Forced Thrust
curve with the Aircraft Zero Fuel Mass per passenger in fig. 15.




         Figure 11 – Pax-scaling effect on ACM ECS fuel consumption for the case study.




                                                 19
                                         More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

Fuel consumption for the E-ACM ECS is shown in fig. 12. The greatest difference from the conven-
tional version is that there is no ECS Forced Thrust. The graph shows no distinct relation to the
pax-scaling.




        Figure 12 – Pax-scaling effect on E-ACM ECS fuel consumption for the case study.




                                                20
                                       More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

A similar graph is shown for the E-VCM ECS. See fig. 13. The E-VCM fuel consumption does not
show a clear relation to pax-scaling.




       Figure 13 – Pax-scaling effect on E-VCM ECS fuel consumption for the case study.




                                              21
                                         More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

The fuel consumption to generate thrust and its dependency on pax-scaling is plotted in fig. 14.
The conventional passenger aircraft’s thrust fuel consumption is higher than the MEA alternatives
throughout the pax-span and is due to the ECS Forced Thrust. As thrust is mainly a function of
weight, these curves’ shapes will mostly follow the aircraft mass per passenger. Compare with fig.
15.




           Figure 14 – Pax-scaling effect on thrust fuel consumption for the case study.




             Figure 15 – Pax-scaling effect on aircraft Zero Fuel Mass per passenger.




                                                22
                                           More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

By summing up the fuel consumption of all systems, the fuel consumption of the whole aircraft is
obtained. See fig. 16.




           Figure 16 – Pax-scaling effect on aircraft fuel consumption for the case study.

The relative fuel savings of the aircraft with E-ACM compared to the aircraft with conventional setup
can be seen in fig. 17. The graph shows an increasing trend of the relative fuel savings with the size
of the passenger aircraft.




 Figure 17 – Pax-scaling effect on aircraft relative fuel savings for the case study. Comparing ACM
     and E-ACM setup. More Electric Aircraft consumes less fuel than the conventional setup.

The relative fuel savings of the aircraft with E-VCM compared to the aircraft with conventional setup
can be seen in fig. 18. The graph shows an increasing trend of the relative fuel savings with the size
of the passenger aircraft.
                                                  23
                                           More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact




 Figure 18 – Pax-scaling effect on aircraft relative fuel savings for the case study. Comparing ACM
     and E-VCM setup. More Electric Aircraft consumes less fuel than the conventional setup.


8. Conclusions
Calculations show that a reduction in fuel consumption is possible when electrifying the ECS. The
MEA technology can therefore help the air transport industry to meet the climate goals. The main
reason is the increased controllability of the compressed air without relying on the engine thrust set-
ting. The weight penalty and increased air scoops drag of the electric ECS offset some operational
fuel efficiency.

For this particular study, with passenger aircraft sizes between 156 and 700 passengers on a round
trip between Copenhagen and Stockholm. The fuel savings varies between 4.0% and 6.8%, when
comparing the ACM and the E-ACM setup. When comparing the ACM and the E-VCM setup, the fuel
savings are even higher. It varies between 5.5% and 8.2%. The relative fuel savings increases with
aircraft size.

The relative fuel savings are affected by the flight distance. The ACM setup is more efficient than
the E-ACM setup during all flight phases except for the takeoff, climb and descent, where the ACM
setup is penalized by high bleed-air temperature and the ECS Forced Thrust. For longer flight dis-
tances, when the mentioned flight phases becomes smaller parts of the flight, the differences in fuel
consumption between ACM and E-ACM setup will also be less.

The numerical model can handle various passenger aircraft configurations and sizes, along with dif-
ferent flight profiles and conditions.

The goal was to compare many subsystems of the passenger aircraft, both conventional and electric.
Due to time constrain, only three types of ECS are included in the model, thus limiting the levels of
electrification. More subsystems can be added in the modular code.

Fuel consumption calculations are not easy to do, as all subsystems interact dynamically, affecting
each other’s power usage. The fuel consumption also depends on many conditions. There is plenty
of room for improvement. The Numerical Model can be calibrated to fit a specific aircraft, or one can

                                                  24
                                                More Electric Aircraft (MEA) - Scaling Aspects and Weight Impact

introduce different Aircraft Profiles and Engine Models to make the simulations more versatile and
accurate. More subsystems may be electrified and integrated. It is also recommended to try many
Flight Profiles, different distances and weather conditions.

9. Contact Author Email Address
Emil Holmgren: lime@kth.se
Dhruv Haldar: haldar@kth.se
Lina Bertling Tjernberg: linab@kth.se
Andreas Johansson: andreas.x.johansson@saabgroup.com

10. Copyright Statement
The authors confirm that they, and/or their company or organization, hold copyright on all the original material
included in this paper. The authors also confirm that they have obtained permission, from the copyright holder
of any third party material included in this paper, to publish it as part of their paper. The authors confirm that
they give permission, or have obtained permission from the copyright holder of this paper, for the publication
and distribution of this paper as part of the ICAS proceedings or as individual off-prints from the proceedings.

References
 [1] Advisory Council for Aviation Research and Innovation in Europe (ACARE). Protecting the environment
     and the energy supply. Url: https://www.acare4europe.org/sria/flightpath-2050-goals/
     protecting-environment-and-energy-supply-0 . Accessed 23 January 2022.
 [2] Yildiz M. On more electric airplane: case study Stockholm - Copenhagen. Master’s thesis, KTH Royal
     Institute of Technology, 2019.
 [3] Scholz D, Seresinhe R, Staack I and Lawson C. Fuel consumption due to shaft power off-takes from
     the engine. 4th International Workshop on Aircraft System Technologies (AST 2013), Hamburg, Ger-
     many, pp. 169–179, 2013. Available online: https://www.fzt.haw-hamburg.de/pers/Scholz/
     Off-Takes/Off-Takes_PUB_AST-CD-Version_13-04-23.pdf
 [4] Code of Federal Regulations by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Code of Federal Regulations.
     Url: https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-14/chapter-I/subchapter-C/part-25#25.
     831. Accessed 28 January 2022.
 [5] Hunt E H, Reid D H, Space D R and Tilton F E. Commercial airliner environmental control system:
     Engineering aspects of cabin air quality. Aerospace Medical Association annual meeting, Anaheim, Cali-
     fornia, pp. 1–8, 1995. Available online: https://web.archive.org/web/20120331055732/http:
     //www.cabinfiles.com/?CFrequest=file;03032001100119. Accessed 18 May 2022.
 [6] Cottony H V, Dill R S. Building materials and structures report BMS64 Solar heating of various surfaces.
     United States Government Printing Office, Washington, 1941. Available online: https://nvlpubs.
     nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/BMS/nbsbuildingmaterialsstructures64.pdf
 [7] Slingerland R, Zandstra S. Bleed air versus electric power off-takes from a turbofan gas tur-
     bine over the flight cycle. 7th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration and Operations Conference
     (ATIO), Belfast, Northern Ireland, vol. 2, no. September, pp.1516–1527, 2007. Available on-
     line:         https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268571644_Bleed_Air_versus_
     Electric_Power_Off-takes_from_a_Turbofan_Gas_Turbine_over_the_Flight_Cycle
 [8] Martínez I. Aircraft environmental control. Available online: http://webserver.dmt.upm.es/
     ~isidoro/tc3/Aircraft%20ECS.pdf
 [9] Merzvinskas M, Bringhenti C, Tomita J T, De Andrade R. Air conditioning systems for aero-
     nautical applications: A review. Aeronautical Journal, Vol. 124, no. 1274, pp. 499–532, 2020.
     Available online:     https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/aeronautical-journal/
     article/abs/air-conditioning-systems-for-aeronautical-applications-a-review/
     2ACB28C145158B38CD2437CDEBAF1350




                                                       25
